Angiosperms are higher plants.
We are going to look at the changes that occurred
to make the different groups or kinds of angiosperms
over time.
This really comes down to a couple of little
changes that have occurred over time that
gave us each individual group.
When we start out, we talk about basal angiosperms.
And these were the ones that lived during
the time of the dinosaurs and we have ideas
of what they looked like based on fossil evidence.
But when we start dealing with these what
we find is basal angiosperms really had 2
cotyledons and they had pollen with 1 opening.
This then gave rise to a group which today
is represented by things like the water lily
were you actually see everything in a spiral
format.
You can see these very distinctive parts and
these are basically remnants from what happened
previously.
The group of this is now called the Nymphales.
From there was the formation of ethereal oils.
You got a folded fan-like carpel, so that
the carpel actually folded around on itself.
But it really didn’t necessarily fuse together
and make something.
But it folded on it.
And from this we have that group which looks
like this.
You can see the carpels that are folded.
When you look at this particular flower, what
we are looking at things again are spiraled.
The carpel when you see it actually is folded,
and the seed is on the inside of it.
And when the seed is released, you get an
unfolding of those carpels.
This shows another one of the same group.
What you see is the same sort of parts.
We group these in the Magnoliids.
And this includes Magnolia and tulip poplar
which at the 2 flowers we have represented
there.
They have flower parts in 3’s and they are
spiraled.
We also have another group where it started
to lose one cotyledon.
So rather than having 2 cotyledons, we now
only have one cotyledon.
With this we see things like this.
This happens to be a banana.
You can see in this particular thing, we start
to get parallel leaf veins.
We have the loss of one cotyledon.
This is a picture of oats.
Oats are grasses.
Again, we have the loss of one cotyledon,
so in this particular case we are looking
at monocots.
This also has seeds that have one less cotyledon,
so they only have one cotyledon, rather than
the 2 that are normal.
Here is your banana when it is going to fruit.
And we call these again monocots.
Flower parts are in 3’s, leaf veins are
parallel.
So they are a little bit different from the
magnoliids.
Even though they have flower parts in 3’s,
there is parallel leaf venation.
We don’t tend to get things that are spiral.
Then there was the loss of ethereal oils
We got plants that had pollen with 3 openings
instead of 1 opening.
Out of this we got a great variety of plants,
that have these characteristics.
We still have 2 cotyledons.
We have pollen with 3 openings, which becomes
very easy to be able to visualize.
It includes the thistle.
We have a bean plant.
Over here on the bean plant, you can see how
it has germinated up and the 2 first leaves,
if we want to call them that, are actually
the cotyledons.
We’ve got, this is a mallow type flower.
Again, it is quite pretty and quite showy
and it fits this particular description.
These are called dicots.
And again with dicots, we have flower parts
in 4’s and 5’s, and we’ve got 2 cotyledons.
So dicots are very interesting, and they are
a step up above the other groups.
Now these together form the basal groups of
the angiosperms that we deal with.
And these are the angiosperms that we can
easily find today.